[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
me
charlie state inside the grounds of
windsor castle
where today the queen will lead the
royal family and the nation in mourning
at the funeral of prince philip the duke
of edinburgh
the service will pay tribute to prince
philip's unwavering loyalty to the queen
many aspects of the ceremony were
planned by the duke with military
precision
the selection of which units which bands
which music
which medals will be there so it is very
much his funeral
designed by him a cherished
moment during 73 years of marriage her
majesty
shares one of her favorite photos of
herself and her husband
relaxing in the scottish islands
this is saint george's chapel in windsor
a small group of family members will
walk through the castle grounds this
afternoon
in procession behind the duke's coffee
we'll be looking ahead to the service
throughout the programme this morning
and also
on breakfast tributes to the actor helen
mccrory who's died at the age of 52.
the author jk rowling described the news
as simply heartbreaking
and in sport the world snooker
championship gets underway in sheffield
this morning
with fans returning to the crucible
theatre the first indoor sporting event
to admit spectators
as part of the government's latest pilot
scheme
[Applause]
good morning a quiet weekend of weather
ahead
yes it's a chilly start once again but
there should be
some decent spells of sunshine for most
of us throughout the day all the details
coming up shortly
it's saturday the 17th of april good
morning
from windsor castle where the funeral of
the duke of edinburgh will take place
this afternoon watched by
millions of people around the world it
will be a small
family affair because in line with
coveted restrictions only 30 people will
be allowed
into st george's chapel the queen will
sit
alone as she says goodbye to her husband
of 73 years
buckingham palace said the service will
celebrate and reflect the duke's life
but they have asked members of the
public to stay away on
breakfast this morning we'll be hearing
from those who knew the duke and those
who've been involved in planning
today's events here's our royal
correspondent nicholas ritchell
a husband and wife a photograph from the
queen's private collection
an image from a strong marriage and a
reminder that today there is a wife
saying farewell
to a beloved partner of 73 years
inside windsor castle st george's chapel
has been made ready
the duke of edinburgh's many decorations
have been placed on the altar
close by the seat he used to occupy the
enamel
stall plate is still in place but his
insignia as a knight of the garter has
been removed
it will be in this section of the chapel
known as the choir
where the 30 members of the congregation
will be seated
around the catapult bearing the duke's
coffin
the funeral procession will have made
its way to the chapel from the castle's
quadrangle
just after 2 40 his coffin will be born
from the state entrance
to be placed on the land rover hearse
the duke helped to design
at 2 45 the small procession will step
off
for the eight minute journey through the
castle some members of the royal family
will walk
behind the coffin the queen will follow
in a limousine
at 2 53 the coffin will arrive at the
west steps of saint george's chapel
it will be born to the top of the steps
where it will pause
at three o'clock a one-minute silence
will be observed before the coffin
enters the chapel for the funeral
service
which will be presided as with
all funerals there's a huge sense of
privilege that you're
with the family any family at this
remarkable point in their lives where
they're grieving someone
they loved profoundly and then with this
funeral there is also that extra sense
of huge privilege but also pride in his
life
the pride is not that i'm there the
pride is
here we are celebrating such a wonderful
life
within the chapel the order of service
will proceed
precisely as the duke had prescribed he
chose the music
and the readings there's a lot in there
that that is very
him you know we've got a land rover
that's been designed by him he's taken a
personal interest
in every aspect of it but but in
particular the selection of which units
which bands which music
which medals will be there so it is very
much his funeral
designed by him the service will end
with the lowering of his coffin to the
royal vault below the chapel
royal marine buglers will sound the last
post
and then action stations a reminder of
the duke's years of service in the royal
navy
a reminder too that he was a royal
consort with a difference
distinctive to the end nicholas witchell
bbc news
so let's remind you the service will
begin at three o'clock this afternoon
uh following a minute silence the order
of service has been released by
buckingham palace and we can take a look
at that now it says the dean of windsor
who will lead the service will pay
tribute to prince philip's kindness
humor
and humanity well joining me now
is our royal correspondent sarah
campbell uh sarah so
these are the details which are just
released late last night is that right
yes the order of service was released
late last night um and i think together
with the details that we've had released
throughout the course of this week we
can see that uh as the head of the armed
forces said yesterday the duke's
imprints uh are
all over it so we saw the pictures there
of the land rover hearse of course
uh a vehicle that he was very much
involved with the design
spent years apparently tweaking it
getting the color right getting
everything just in the right place
that very sort of clear uh clear of his
imprints and as i said the order of
service a service
that he wanted to have a deeply
religious service
in line we're told by buckingham palace
with not with royal funerals there's no
eulogy there are no readings by members
of the royal family but what does come
through
with the hymns with the music that's
been chosen was his love of the sea
and definitely connection with the royal
navy
the bidding it will be led by the dean
of windsor and his bidding he starts off
by saying
we've been inspired by his unwavering
loyalty
to our queen by his service to the
nation and to the commonwealth by his
courage
his fortitude and his faith and he talks
about his
kindness his humor and his humanity one
of the hymns which will be sung
is eternal father strong to save now
this was chosen by the duke
traditionally associated with seafarers
and the maritime
armed serve a maritime armed services as
the coffin at the end is lowered
into the royal vault there'll be buglers
that will play they will play the last
post and they will also
play action stations now this is the
call to man battle stations heard on
warships
again very much a reminder of the duke's
active service as a naval officer
during the second world war now as
people will see
later in the day this event is very
different from
any other there is a military presence
within the walls of the castle the
procession itself
but covid restrictions will be very
apparent
as people watch today absolutely um
there will be no public element i think
that is all the big
difference that would be from a normal
royal funeral where you'd expect a big
public element so that people could come
together
to mourn together and that is what
cannot happen because crowds
cannot come together so all of this the
procession
will be held behind castle walls as i
drove in this morning there are signs
all around windsor saying basically
you know do not come do not gather at
royal residences so the message
throughout the week really has been
if you want to leave a tribute there's
an online book of condolence
leave it there donate to charity rather
than leaving flowers
and if you want to watch the funeral or
if you want to listen to the funeral
watch it on television listen to it on
radio
and it will be it will be a different it
will feel different
inside the chapel when there would have
been 800 mourners
there will only be 30. and i think the
archbishop of canterbury when he was
speaking yesterday was saying
that you know this this will be around
the country people will be able to
empathize with this because
many of us have been to funerals i think
over the last year which would have had
many more people there but instead
people will be alone the queen will be
alone she will be wearing a face mask
there will be nobody to put an arm
around her and i think that is what will
really make it feel very different
and it's worth telling people and we
stand here this morning it is a
beautiful day
and people will have seen that from the
images we've shown you of windsor castle
it is a beautiful day the setting is
spectacular
but necessarily because the cast itself
is a confined space
it will be a very private event but the
eyes of the world will be allowed in
through television indeed and there will
be 700 or so
members of the armed forces here
detachments lining the route detachments
which the duke had a personal connection
to whether he was colonel in chief
so that it will still feel like a royal
event there will still be the military
association but as you say
it will be public only as far as the
television uh is concerned so people
we've been saying all week about not
leaving tributes and that that's been
the message and people have still wanted
to come windsor is a big
tourist town it has been quite busy this
week and i suspect it probably will be
quite busy today
as you say it's a beautiful day but as
long as people are aware they will not
be able to see what's going on sarah for
the moment thank you very much
well the funeral will be watched across
the world but particularly so
in the commonwealth africa correspondent
catherine
biaranga is with us now in the kenyan
capital
nairobi very good morning to you
catherine
kenya holds a particular significance
for the queen
and philip doesn't
yes it does good morning charlie and
just where i'm speaking to you right now
is uhura park and just behind it
is the parliament of kenya now when this
country gained independence from britain
in 1963
prince philip was here taking part in a
number of ceremonies
and one of the or and one of them was
the opening
of parliament now going back a decade
before that
this was the country where the queen
found out that she had actually become
queen she was here on a royal tour with
the prince
when her father passed away and it was
down to prince philip himself
to tell her that she was now the monarch
catherine in other circumstances uh
places across the world may be marking
today's events very differently tell us
a little bit about
how they will be remembering the duke
there
well it's quite a difficult situation
for nairobi
and other cities across the continent
because of the coronavirus pandemic
nairobi is under a partial lockdown
people
are discouraged from gathering and we
understand from the foreign and
commonwealth
office that there will be no official
events and everyone is being directed
to the online book of condolence to be
able to share memories and pass on
their condolences to the royal family
now this is a continent that usually
would mark an occasion like this
most likely with a head of state taking
part in an event
together with the the high commission
here
so coronavirus is having an impact and i
think
most people will be following events on
their televisions here
catherine thank you very much
so you can follow live coverage of the
funeral of course
in a special program from half past
midday
it's here on bbc one there will be
further coverage from
ten past 8 this evening as well
it will also be broadcast on bbc radio 4
and radio 5 live coverage starting
from 2pm
you